% Options for packages loaded elsewhere
\PassOptionsToPackage{unicode}{hyperref}
\PassOptionsToPackage{hyphens}{url}
%
\documentclass[
]{article}
\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{iftex}
\ifPDFTeX
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
  \usepackage{textcomp} % provide euro and other symbols
\else % if luatex or xetex
  \usepackage{unicode-math}
  \defaultfontfeatures{Scale=MatchLowercase}
  \defaultfontfeatures[\rmfamily]{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=1}
\fi
% Use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{% use microtype if available
  \usepackage[]{microtype}
  \UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\makeatletter
\@ifundefined{KOMAClassName}{% if non-KOMA class
  \IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
    \usepackage{parskip}
  }{% else
    \setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
    \setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}}
}{% if KOMA class
  \KOMAoptions{parskip=half}}
\makeatother
\usepackage{xcolor}
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
% Set default figure placement to htbp
\makeatletter
\def\fps@figure{htbp}
\makeatother
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em} % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{5}
\usepackage{float}
\floatplacement{figure}{hp}
\usepackage{booktabs}
\usepackage[font=small,labelfont=bf]{caption}
\usepackage{setspace}\doublespacing
\ifLuaTeX
  \usepackage{selnolig}  % disable illegal ligatures
\fi
\IfFileExists{bookmark.sty}{\usepackage{bookmark}}{\usepackage{hyperref}}
\IfFileExists{xurl.sty}{\usepackage{xurl}}{} % add URL line breaks if available
\urlstyle{same} % disable monospaced font for URLs
\hypersetup{
  pdftitle={A codebook for summarizing presence or absence of stone tool-making techniques reported in the literature v.1.0},
  pdfauthor={-Jonathan Paige},
  pdfkeywords={keyword 1; keyword 2; keyword 3},
  hidelinks,
  pdfcreator={LaTeX via pandoc}}

\title{A codebook for summarizing presence or absence of stone
tool-making techniques reported in the literature v.1.0}
\author{-Jonathan Paige\footnote{Institute of Human Origins, School of
  Human Evolution and Social Change, Arizona State University,
  \href{mailto:jnpaige@asu.edu}{\nolinkurl{jnpaige@asu.edu}}}}
\date{}

\begin{document}
\maketitle

{
\setcounter{tocdepth}{3}
\tableofcontents
}
\hypertarget{version-details}{%
\section{Version details:}\label{version-details}}

This report was generated on 2023-04-16 21:47:57 The current Git commit
details are:

\begin{verbatim}
## Local:    master C:/Users/Jon Paige/Desktop/Procedural.unit.codebook
## Remote:   master @ origin (https://github.com/jnpaige/Procedural.unit.codebook.git)
## Head:     [a762ac5] 2023-04-17: Update README.md
\end{verbatim}

I made this codebook while working on ways of quantifying variation in
tool-making sequences across the archaeological record. In this case the
unit of analysis is the technique, or procedural unit (Perreault et al.,
2013). I coded procedural units as present or absent across
archaeological assemblages, based on published reports describing those
assemblages. Most systematic, comparative work on lithic technology has
focused on units of analysis that are more consistent, and replicable
across assemblages. For example flake and biface measurements, and shape
variation can be very consistent between studies. Other aspects of
lithic technology, like chaînes opératoire or reduction sequences that
we are interested in, are not as easy to analyze statistically.
Similarity and dissimilarity in them is difficult to quantify
systematically because they represent qualitative data conveyed through
prose descriptions, tables of artifact counts, and illustrations of
individual artifacts and schematics of those sequences. How sequences
are reported might vary by the research tradition of the analyst, and
how I interpret those reports is also shaped by the tradition I am a
part of. This is a big hurdle to making systematic comparisons of
technology across many assemblages (Reynolds, 2018). Reliably extracting
the presence or absence of procedural units from the complex
descriptions of stone tool technologies is a similar problem to that
faced by scientists who code interview transcripts, and other texts.
There are limits to human abilities to make sense of complex
information, and individual scientists may use their own heuristics, and
prior experience to collapse and make sense of that information. Those
heuristics, and mental shortcuts introduce bias and error into the
analysis (Hruschka et al., 2004; MacQueen et al., 1998; Tversky \&
Kahneman, 1974). One way to reduce this error is to give clear
definitions of each procedural unit. Clear definitions, however, are not
enough. If I gave a careful definition of the procedural unit ``core
tablet``, there may be many forms that could be accomodated into that
definition that I had not taken into account.

Likewise, other researchers may have different standards by which they
would count a`` core tablet`` as being present in an assemblage. Some
may be happy to find flakes that have the features of a core tablet, and
count them as core tablets. Others may only count flakes with those
features if there are also cores with negative removals consistent with
core tablet removals. Others may have very different ideas of what the
features of a core tablet are, and slightly different interpretations of
those features themselves. The problem with using only definitions, is
that it does not give enough guidance on what forms do not meet that
definition, and when we should code ``core tablet`` as present. Social
scientists at the Center for Disease Control encountered similar
problems while coding interview transcripts and other texts for
qualitative analysis. Their solution was to develop codebooks with
explicit inclusion, and exclusion criteria. This codebook follows a
format developed at the CDC to ensure reliability in coding texts
(MacQueen et al., 1998). Each procedural unit has a short, and longer
definition (if needed). Additionally, each also has inclusion criteria.
These inclusion criteria describe what features need to be present in a
report for us to count the procedural unit as present. Each also has
exclusion criteria. These describe what features in the text would be
grounds to count the procedural unit as absent. For example, many
procedural units only make sense to count as present if hierarchical
core reduction is present. So, one exclusion criteria for those
procedural units would be the absence of any evidence for hierarchical
core reduction. Each entry may also include typical, and atypical
examples of the procedural unit. These may be illustrations, or text
examples. These two help to further outline when it is appropriate to
code a procedural unit as present. Finally, there is a ``close, but no``
entry, which outlines what kinds of cases might be confused with the
procedural unit. Some of these inclusion criteria are more exhaustive
than others, especially in cases where I noticed that I came to
different conclusions about how a procedural unit should be coded
multiple times while double checking data. Whether or not you agree with
all the definitions, and coding criteria, you should be able to come
closer to the same conclusions about how to code the presence or absence
of any of these procedural units if you follow the standards outlined in
the codebook than would be the case without reporting the criteria I
employed. The codebook should evolve over time, as new logical
inconsistencies or points of confusion are discovered. However, whatever
version was used to code the data that then ends up in a final analysis,
should be archived and made available to readers. This version of the
codebook does not have example illustrations for procedural units to
avoid copyright issues, but references to the illustrations are
retained.

\hypertarget{definitions}{%
\section{Definitions}\label{definitions}}

\textbf{Hierarchical cores} Cores wherin platforms are established to
strike flakes that shape the main flaking surface of a core, or the main
platform itself in preparation for removals across the main flaking
surface.

\textbf{Main flaking axis} On hierarchical cores, this is the axis
parallel to the face along which most target pieces were produced. On a
naviform core, for example, the main flaking axis is that along which
bidirectional blades are taken. Radial cores have no main flaking axis.
Centripetal levallois cores also have no main falking axis, while
preferential levallois cores do.

\textbf{Main flaking surface} On hierarchical cores, this is the surface
from which targetted blanks were removed.

\textbf{Core platform} Any of the edges percussed or applied with
pressure to remove flakes.

\textbf{Main core platform(s)} The platforms used to produce target
pieces. Blade platforms on blade cores. Facetted platform on a
preferential levallois.

\textbf{Core back} Posterior surface relative to the main flaking
surface, roughly parallel to the main flaking surface.

\textbf{Core bottom} Distal surface of a core, opposite the main core
platform.

\hypertarget{procedural-unit-codes}{%
\section{Procedural unit codes}\label{procedural-unit-codes}}

\hypertarget{raw-material-treatment}{%
\subsection{Raw material treatment}\label{raw-material-treatment}}

\textbf{Short Description} Heat treatment of raw material

\textbf{Definition} Heating of raw material in order to improve
workability. This process alters the fracture mechanics of raw material,
and often causes changes in texture, and color.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} If heat treatment is described as present,
code as yes. If heating is described, and reference made to
glassy/glossy texture of raw material as a result of heating, code as
present.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Heat treatment not mentioned in text.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} ``Flint was/was likely heat treated''

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} ``flint was glossed/waxy/greasy from
heating''

\textbf{Close but no} ``material was fired'', ``material bears signs of
thermal alteration'', Images of pieces that appear to have been heat
treated, but without accompanying text describing them as heat treated.
``Some flints had a glossy/waxy/greasy appearance''.

\hypertarget{faceting-of-core-platform}{%
\subsection{Faceting of core platform}\label{faceting-of-core-platform}}

\textbf{Short Description} Shaping of a core platform by striking flakes
into the platform from the face of the core.

\textbf{Definition} Removal of two or more flakes struck into the face
of a core across the platform, forming a platform with two or more
parallel facets.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Include in cases only where hierarchical
core reduction is described. Code if facetting of platforms is described
in the text as a method of preparing platforms. Code if illustrations
show evidence of faceting.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Determining presence based on illustrations
alone requires illustrations of the platforms themselves. Inferring
platform faceting from dorsal or ventral views of a flake are
inappropriate. Do not code if no mention of faceting of platforms. Do
not code if no other evidence of hierarchical core reduction described.
Do not code if the flakes were likely not struck into the face of the
core

\textbf{Typical exemplars} Figure 1. Pieces a, c, d, e, f, g, h.

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} Figure 1. Piece b. Figure 2. Pieces 1, 3-7,
Figure 3. Step D.

\textbf{Close but no} Phrases like ``platforms were carefully prepared''
without additional supporting information about the nature of that
preparation. Single or very sparse instances of facetted or dihedral
platforms, especially where no other evidence of hierarchical
reduction** ``Nevertheless it is important to mention that within the
excluded material of the `MSA base-complex' (see above) one
flake\ldots{} shows characteristics of a Levallois preferential flake
with centripetal dorsal scars and a facetted striking platform\ldots{}''
(Schmidt, 2011, p.~92). All examples in figure 4 would be insufficient
to code as present.

\hypertarget{face-shaping-through-radial-removals}{%
\subsection{Face shaping through radial
removals}\label{face-shaping-through-radial-removals}}

\textbf{Short Description} Shaping of the face of a core through
centripetal removals along the perimeter of a core face.

\textbf{Definition} Flakes taken to modify the distal, lateral, medial
convexities of a round core face, to prepare it for preferential
removals. The preferential removals could be unidirectional or
bidirectional blades, or preferential flakes.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Consistent evidence for radial scars on
blanks. Cores with evidence of centripetal preparation and hierarchical
setup. Core faces should be rounded/oval, not rectilinear. Description
of centripetal preparation of cores.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} radial cores without evidence for
preferential removals, presence of only lateral trimming, or distal
trimming flakes on a prepared core.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} Figure 5. Pieces 1, 2, 4, 7.

\textbf{Atypical exemplars}

\textbf{Close but no} Figure 5. Pieces 3, 5, 6. Discoid cores,
non-hierarchical core faces, biface thinning, cores of a rectilinear
shape with both lateral trimming and distal trimming.

\hypertarget{lateral-trimming}{%
\subsection{Lateral trimming}\label{lateral-trimming}}

\textbf{Short Description} Lateral convexity of core face is shaped with
flakes initiated from platforms along lateral margins of core.\\
Definition** The lateral convexities of the face of a core are trimmed
through the removal of flakes from the lateral margin of the face
(i.e.~from platforms parallel to main flaking axis)

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Explicit descriptions of lateral trimming on
hierarchical cores, and unambiguous illustrations of cores with lateral
trimming.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Do not count if** lateral flakes were struck
only during radial/centripetal preparation of a core face, If lateral
convexities are only trimmed through debordante removals, or if part of
lateral margin of a core has flake removals on it, but that core is not
preferential, or hierarchical. Also do not count if the lateral margin
of a core has flake scars perpendicular to the main flaking axis, but
those flakes originated from a crest used to establish the core face, or
otherwise did not originate from a platform at the lateral margin of the
core.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} Figure 6, no. 4.

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} Figure 5. Piece 3.

\textbf{Close but no} descriptions of debordant, but without further
specifics about the orientation of trimming flakes.

\hypertarget{distal-trimming}{%
\subsection{Distal trimming}\label{distal-trimming}}

\textbf{Short Description} Face shaped with flakes initiated from
platform at distal margin of core Definition** Distal convexities of the
face of a hierarchical core are managed through the removal of flakes
from a platform at the distal margin of the core (i.e.~the platform is
perpendicular to the main flaking axis).

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Core faces show evidence for flake removals
from distal margin. Must be on hierarchical cores, and must be in
context of managing distal convexities of the core.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Do not count if** the core could be
reasonably characterized as centripetally prepared, if these are flakes
initiated from the distal margin that trim the lateral margins of a
core, like what we might find in a Nubian Levallois core. Do not count
as present if no hierarchical cores are present.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} Figure 5, Levallois cores numbers 5, 6.,
Figure 6, Levallois core with lateral trimming, number 4. Figure 7. Step
4 in blademaking sequence.

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} Figure 8. Step 3 in Chazan's description of
La Ferrassie bladelets. Notching a bladelet, to supply end point of
microblades taken from lateral margin of that bladelet core. Controls
length of flaking surface by establishing/shaping a distal convexity.

\textbf{Close but no}

\hypertarget{back-shaping}{%
\subsection{Back shaping}\label{back-shaping}}

\textbf{Short Description} Back of the core is shaped.

\textbf{Definition} Back of core is shaped, as is case among naviform
cores, and Asian microblade cores. All examples so far identified are
cases where a nodule was bifacially flaked. One of the flaked crests
then is used to remove one or two crested blades to establish a platform
and face. Then flakes are removed from that platfom until exhausted.
When exhausted there remains evidence of original bifacial flaking at
the back of the core.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Back of hierarchical core is shaped,
typically bifacially.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Crested blades are present, but no
illustrations of cores showing evidence for a modified back/non-flaking
surface.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} Figure 9. Piece 2b.

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Close but no} NA

\hypertarget{cresting}{%
\subsection{Cresting}\label{cresting}}

\textbf{Short Description} Cresting to shape core face during initial
steps of core preparation. Definition** A core is bifacially or
unifacially flaked along one axis. That crest establishes an artificial
ridge along which an elongated flake, with a crested (entirely or
partially) dorsal surface is removed.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Cresting of core faces is described as
present and/or figures show elements flakes bearing a crest, with at
least a partial crest platform present.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Cresting of core faces is described as
absent. No mention in the text, and there are no illustration of crested
pieces. For example** from Shimelmitz et. Al. 2011** ``The reduction
takes advantage of the natural shape of the raw material and does not
include pre-shaping and decortication''.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} Figure 10. Flakes whose dorsal surface bears
a full bifacially flaked crest. Pieces 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7.

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} From Wilkins and Chazan** ``The rarity of
crested blades (0.3\%, Table 7) and the presence of blades with
centripetal flake dorsal scars on one side only (4.2\%, Fig. 9e,h) are
most consistent with a reduction strategy that generally prepared the
blade exploitation surface with centripetal flake removals''(Wilkins \&
Chazan, 2012** p.~10). This is enough to code cresting as present in the
assemblage. ``Crested elements (n=26) provide some details of the
methods used for initial core preparation. The relatively low number of
these pieces compared to the high number of cores used to produce
blade/bladelet suggests that, in general, cresting was not necessary,
and the natural shape of cobbles/nodules allowed the production of
elongated debitage without cresting.''(Smith et al., 2016).

\textbf{Close but no} flakes with laterally oriented dorsal scars.
Partially crested blades, where no element of the platform of the crest
is present. Ski spall flakes removed during reduction of naviform cores
which were prepared through cresting. Flakes with unifacial cresting,
either complete or partial as in the case of striking platform removals
as described in Smith et al.~2016.

\hypertarget{debordantes}{%
\subsection{Debordantes}\label{debordantes}}

\textbf{Short Description} Elongated flakes along lateral margins of
core face, knapped along the axis of the main flaking surface.

\textbf{Definition} Elongated flakes removed from lateral margins of
core face, knapped along the axis of the main flaking surface.
Debordantes only include materials that maintain lateral and distal and
sometimes proximal convexities of a core face. These can be removed
either from the proximal/main core platform (more common), or distal
area of the core (see **Atypical exemplars below). These tend to have a
triangular cross section. In near eastern traditions these are sometimes
refered to as naturally backed blades or knives (Shimelmitz et al.,
2011; Smith et al., 2016) though these sometimes might refer to elements
that are not from hierarchical preferential cores, that happen to have a
wedge shaped cross section.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Must be in association with
description/illustration of hierarchical preferential cores. If that
condition is met, and the term debordante is used and likely is not
referring to what we would otherwise code as lateral trimming, count as
present. If backed flake/knife is used, only count as present if there
is further discussion about the role they play in managing convexities
of core face, OR if core faces show clear evidence of debordante
removals in illustrations. If ``debordante'' is not used, but there are
phrases like ``elongated flakes were used to alighn the core face/modify
lateral and distal convexities/modify core edges'' count as present.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Naturally backed flakes described as
present, but there is no mention of their function in maintaining the
face geometry of the core, or convexities of the core. Flakes are
described as debordante, but there is otherwise no mention illustration
or description of the nature of cores. Or, there is description of cores
and they are non-hierarchical/amorphous.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} From Wilkins and Chazan** ``Débordant
flakes/blades with unidirectional or bidirectional dorsal scars and a
preserved lateral platform surface are also present in the assemblage (n
¼ 13, 1.3\%, Fig. 9a) and may have sometimes been used to rejuvenate
core edges''(Wilkins \& Chazan, 2012). Figure 5. Pieces 5, 6, and 9 in
figure below.

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} Naturally backed blades described in
Shimelmitz et al.~2011. Pieces that are described as backed but in
context of discussion about managing lateral convexities. For example**
``Only one elongated flake could be attributed to the Taramsa reduction
method. The presence of many backed pieces (N=10) confirms this trend,
since these flakes are removed to maintain the strong lateral convexity
of the core''(Spinapolice \& Garcea, 2013). Figure 5. Piece 8.

\textbf{Close but no} Discussion of face shaping with flake removals or
discussion of naturally backed blades/knives/flakes without mention of
the role they served in maintaining face shape/convexity.

\hypertarget{overshot-flakes}{%
\subsection{Overshot flakes}\label{overshot-flakes}}

\textbf{Short Description} Elongated flake removals that clip or remove
the distal margin of the core.

\textbf{Definition} Medial and distal convexities of a core face on a
preferential hierarchical core are modified with an invasive flake that
removes the distal end of the core, which may bear a platform (often
opposed to its own) on the distal margin.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Flakes or blades that extend across the
entire face of the core must be in association with hierarchical
blade/bladelet/microblade cores, discussion must include discussion of
overshot blades/flakes, and/or include illustrations of overshot
flakes/blades.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} No argument for presence. No Hierarchical
preferential cores. No overshot blades/flakes in illustrations. No
discussion of overshot blade/flake role in modifying distal
convexity/rejuvenating distal platform.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} Shimelmitz et al.~2011** ``The frequent
removal of laminar items with an overpassing end termination along the
reduction in order to control core convexities.''

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} From Wilkins and Chazan. ``Blades preserving
a distal striking platform (Fig. 7d) further attest to the bidirectional
production of blades.''. This phrase has enough information for us to
code this as an overshot blade, but there is also supporting information
in the figure showing overshot blades.

\textbf{Close but no} Blades that are thick at the distal end, but do
not bear the distal end of the core. Flakes that have a distal end of
core, but the distal end is cortex. Overshot flakes are present in an
assemblage, but there is no evidence for hierarchical core reduction.

\hypertarget{kombewa}{%
\subsection{Kombewa}\label{kombewa}}

\textbf{Short Description} Removal of flake from ventral surface of a
flake

\textbf{Definition} Ventral surface of a flake is treated as a core face

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Kombewa technique described as present,
``janus flakes'' and the processes to make them are described

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Discussion of removal of flakes from flakes
is ambiguous about whether or not kombewa technique is present. No
mention of janus flakes.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} ``cleavers were made on sometimes completely
unmodified Kombewa flakes''

\textbf{Atypical exemplars}

\textbf{Close but no} Core on flake described as present without
discussion of where the flaking surface is on that flake. Flakes from
retouching large flakes, which be initiated at dorsal margin, and
capture some of the ventral surface. Scars not propagated across ventral
surface. Burin spalls, or tranchet spalls taken from flakes.

\hypertarget{core-tablet-removals}{%
\subsection{Core tablet removals}\label{core-tablet-removals}}

\textbf{Short Description} Flake removals that rejuvinate or prepare a
core platform, by removing some or all of the core platform.

\textbf{Definition} Striking a flake into the face of a core, where the
dorsal surface of that flake is the main platform of a core. These are
intended to rejuvinate the core platform by establishing a fresh flaking
surface.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Descriptions of core tablets, or
illustrations of core tablets themselves and the function they served in
rejuvenating core platforms, or illustrations of cores with strong
evidence for core tablet removals.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Coding as present should not be based only
on illustrations of pieces that look like tablets. It should also not
normally be based on illustrations of cores that have a single scar as
the platform without supporting evidence that that scar was made to
rejuvenate the platfrom (see Atypical exemplars below). Do not code as
present if only evidences are flakes that happen to remove platforms,
but no other evidence for hierarchical cores, Flakes with large facetted
proximal margins without any other information in the text about
rejuvenation of platforms.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} Figure 11. Cores a and d.~Phrases like, `the
assemblage has several core tablets'.

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} Figure 11. Cores b and e. In Figure 12 we
can see that a flake was taken across the top of the core (the negative
bulb of the flake is present) and this flake erased the negative bulbs
of several of the blade scars (the flake did not just establish a
platform, but was taken after several blades had been struck. These
lines of evidence on a single platform hierarchical core are sufficient
to infer that these cores were rejuvenated with tablets.

\textbf{Close but no} Figure 12. Pieces 1-4. Without additional
information about the geometry of the core from which these were taken,
we should not call these core tablets (though the paper from which the
figure is borrowed provides enough context to call these tablets).

\hypertarget{abrasiongrinding}{%
\subsection{Abrasion/grinding}\label{abrasiongrinding}}

\textbf{Short Description} Abrasion or grinding performed at any point
in reduction sequence.

\textbf{Definition} Core was abraded/ground to strengthen platform, or
tools were abraded or ground as part of production sequence.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} any discussion of the abrasion, rubbing, of
the core platform in relation to platform preparation in the text, or
the presence of grinding/abrasion to finish a tool.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} No explicit description of abrasion as the
strategy used to prepare the platform. Platform preparation described,
but the kind of preparation not explicitly described. Tools appear
ground/abraded but no discussion of the technique in text.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} `platforms were prepared by abrasion.'

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} ``These bifaces have several common
attributes. All were primarily shaped by abrasion by rubbing with a
coarse material, leaving parallel striae on their surface'' (Rosenthal,
1996).

\textbf{Close but no} NA

\hypertarget{overhang-removalmicrochipping-of-area-below-platform}{%
\subsection{Overhang removal/microchipping of area below
platform}\label{overhang-removalmicrochipping-of-area-below-platform}}

\textbf{Short Description} Removal of chips to modify area below
platform.

\textbf{Definition} Removal of chips initiated from platform to modify
proximal margin of core face/proximal convexities, and modify the
platform angle.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Illustrations show small flakes removed at
proximal margin of flakes, or on areas below core platforms.
Descriptions of overhang removal, or microchipping of platform in text.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} No evidence of microchipping, overhang
removal described in text, or in illustrations. Microchipping described
in text, but this refers to what we would otherwise code as faceting.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Close but no} NA

\hypertarget{percussion-by-striking-with-hard-hammer}{%
\subsection{Percussion by striking with hard
hammer}\label{percussion-by-striking-with-hard-hammer}}

\textbf{Short Description} Use of a hard hammer

\textbf{Definition} Use of a hard hammer strike onto some substrate,
whether it is a core, held in the had, mounted on an anvil, or whether
the hammer itself was struck on an anvil (as in case of passive hammer
technique)

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} If flakes are produced in assemblage, count
as present unless explicitly stated as absent

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Explicit statement in text saying hard
hammer use was absent

\textbf{Typical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Close but no} NA

\hypertarget{core-supported-by-hand}{%
\subsection{Core supported by hand}\label{core-supported-by-hand}}

\textbf{Short Description} Any stage of tool manufacture includes
holding the core in hand while striking it (i.e.~use of anvil is
absent).

\textbf{Definition} NA

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Count as present if bipolar percussion is
not described as present, if description of freehand percussion in text.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Explicit statement in text saying only
bipolar, or passive anvil technique was employed, or description only of
flake removals while core was mechanically mounted, or otherwise not
supported by hand.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Close but no} NA

\hypertarget{use-of-anvil-to-support-core}{%
\subsection{Use of anvil to support
core}\label{use-of-anvil-to-support-core}}

\textbf{Short Description} Any incorporation of an anvil in the
reduction process.

\textbf{Definition} Use of an anvil at any point in the tool reduction
sequence.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Any discussion of anvil use, all cases of
bipolar percussion, except where bipolar refers to flake removals from
two opposing platforms where an anvil is not used (i.e.~a bidirectional
core without bipolar percussion). Cases where bipolar is mentioned must
also have some visual evidence for bipolar percussion with an anvil (in
the form of scaled pieces, for example).

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Bipolar percussion not mentioned in text. No
mention of use of anvil to support core in any way.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} ``\ldots many of our early replications were
performed with the aid of an anvil (Figure 5), and this was found to be
a successful technique for creating the initial steep sides on large
flakes and cobbles. Anvil resting was more successful than true bipolar
flaking in generating steep-angled edges and moving flaking on to new
edges'' (Clarkson et al., 2015** p.74)

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} NA

\hypertarget{core-rotation}{%
\subsection{Core rotation}\label{core-rotation}}

\textbf{Definition} Core rotated at any point in reduction sequence

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Any evidence of flakes removed across two or
more distinct axes.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Single platform cores are present without
evidence of removals across the top of the core.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Close but no} NA

\hypertarget{soft-hammer}{%
\subsection{Soft Hammer}\label{soft-hammer}}

\textbf{Short Description} Use of a soft hammer

\textbf{Definition} use of a soft hammer (whether the material be wood,
bone, soft stone, etc).

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Authors explicitly state that soft hammer
percussion was likely used OR soft hammers present in the archaeological
assemblage, and forms of pieces appear consistent with use of soft
hammers. For example, if delicate, thin, wide flakes present and
soft-hammers were recovered from related contexts.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} No mention of soft hammer use, no
soft-hammers present in the assemblage. Evidence for soft hammer use
described as unclear.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} `Soft hammer use likely occurred'

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} `Soft hammers are necessary for producing
these forms, also see Figure x. for soft hammers recovered from the
archaeological record'

\textbf{Close but no} `Soft hammer use could have been employed/other
assemblages with similar forms have soft hammers'

\hypertarget{indirect-percussion}{%
\subsection{Indirect percussion}\label{indirect-percussion}}

\textbf{Short Description} Use of a punch to remove flakes

\textbf{Definition} Use of a punch of any given material placed on a
platform, and struck with a hammer to punch flakes from the core.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Authors explicitly state that indirect
percussion was likely used.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} No mention of indirect percussion,
statements like ``indirect percussion is one method that could produce
the forms here''.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} `The blades in this assemblages would have
likely required indirect percussion', `experimental reconstructions of
the stitching pattern on these Danish daggers indicate that indirect
percussion/use of a punch would have been required'

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Close but no} `Indirect percussion could have been employed'

\hypertarget{flaking-with-application-of-pressure}{%
\subsection{Flaking with application of
pressure}\label{flaking-with-application-of-pressure}}

\textbf{Short Description} Removal of flakes through application of
pressure on core platform

\textbf{Definition} Use of typically soft indentor, bone, metal, or hard
wood, to press flakes off cores.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Discussion of pressure flaking as means of
producing flakes.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} no evidence of scars consistent in pressure
flaking AND no discussion of pressure flaking in the text.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} `Microblades were struck through application
of pressure'

\textbf{Atypical exemplars}

\textbf{Close but no} `Other assemblages with similar forms have
pressure flakers'

\hypertarget{peckinghammer-dressing}{%
\subsection{Pecking/hammer dressing}\label{peckinghammer-dressing}}

\textbf{Short Description} Modification of core or tool through pecking

\textbf{Definition} NA

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Hammer dressing, or pecking described in
text as method employed at any point in tool manufacture. Hammer
dressing is unambiguously present in illustrations.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} No hammer dressing or pecking described in
text. Illustrations show no unambiguous presence of hammer dressing.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} Figure 13.

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Close but no} NA

\hypertarget{invasive-flaking}{%
\subsection{Invasive flaking}\label{invasive-flaking}}

\textbf{Short Description} Removal of non-cortical flakes that extend
beyond the midpoint of the core face

\textbf{Definition} NA

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Examples of invasive negative flake scars
present in core illustrations.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} No illustrations of invasive negative flake
scars on cores, no description of flakes invasive to the degree that
they extend beyond midline. Invasive flakes are cortical.

\textbf{Typical exemplars}

\textbf{Atypical exemplars}

\textbf{Close but no} Invasive flaking described only in text, but
without further information about how invasive the flake are.

\hypertarget{ochre-use}{%
\subsection{Ochre use}\label{ochre-use}}

\textbf{Short Description} Use of ochre in any stage of tool making

\textbf{Definition}Use of ochre as a pigment or as a binding agent.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Ochre applied to tool.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} No mention of ochre in text, and

\textbf{Typical exemplars} `Ochre was applied to points', `the adhesive
residues include ochre'

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Close but no} NA

\hypertarget{asphalt-use}{%
\subsection{Asphalt use}\label{asphalt-use}}

\textbf{Short Description} Use of aslphalt at any stage of the tool
making process.

\textbf{Definition} Use of asphalt as a binding agent

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Asphalt adhered to tool, typically at its
base/tang.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} No mention of asphalt residue on tools in
the text.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} `asphalt was applied to points', `the
adhesive residues include asphalt'

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Close but no} NA

\hypertarget{tanging}{%
\subsection{Tanging}\label{tanging}}

\textbf{Short Description} Retouching base of piece to form a tang

\textbf{Definition} Retouching a piece, typically through backing and
notching at the base of a piece in order to facilitate hafting the
piece.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Description of retouch as forming a tang for
the purpose of hafting.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} No mention of tanging, or hafting. Pieces
bearing notches are not described as hafted.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} No mention of tanging, but pieces with basal
modifications consistent with a tang are described as frequent or have
many illustrations.

\textbf{Close but no} NA

\hypertarget{invasive-retouch}{%
\subsection{Invasive retouch}\label{invasive-retouch}}

\textbf{Short Description} retouch that extends to the midline of the
artifact.

\textbf{Definition} NA

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Illustrations of retouched pieces showing
retouch extending to midline of tool.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} No illustrations of retouched pieces.

\textbf{Typical exemplars}

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} Burin spalls that extend to the midline of
the artifact. Tranchet spalls.

\textbf{Close but no} Retouch described as invasive, but retouch scars
in illustrations extend short of the midline of the artifact.

\hypertarget{retouch-unifacial}{%
\subsection{Retouch (unifacial)}\label{retouch-unifacial}}

\textbf{Short Description} Retouch of flake (unifacial only)

\textbf{Definition}

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Retouch described as present. Illustrations
of pieces show unambiguous evidence of retouch.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Bifacial retouch is present. No unambiguous
illustrations of unifacially retouched pieces, and no mention of
retouch.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Close but no} NA

\hypertarget{backing}{%
\subsection{Backing}\label{backing}}

\textbf{Short Description} Retouch forms an abrupt, scraper-like margin

\textbf{Definition} Retouch that increases the angle of the margin to
\textasciitilde70-90 degrees.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Presence of artifacts with retouch that
forms an angle greater than 70 degrees. Description of scrapers in
assemblage.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Lack of evidence for artifacts with retouch
forming greater than 70 degree angle. Or evidence is ambiguous. No
mention of scrapers, or illustrations of retouched tools.

\textbf{Typical exemplars}

\textbf{Atypical exemplars}

\textbf{Close but no} Abrupt retouch on flat thin flakes.

\hypertarget{notching}{%
\subsection{Notching}\label{notching}}

\textbf{Short Description} Retouch forms round concavity.

\textbf{Definition} Retouch, either unifacial or bifacial, forms a round
concavity, or series of concavities.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Description of notches, or denticulates.
Illustration of pieces with notches formed.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Lack of evidence for artifacts with retouch
forming greater than 70 degree angle. Or evidence is ambiguous. No
mention of scrapers, or illustrations of retouched tools.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} Figure 14. Piece 1. Figure 15. Pieces E, F.

\textbf{Atypical exemplars}

\textbf{Close but no} Abrupt retouch on flat thin flakes.

\hypertarget{burination}{%
\subsection{Burination}\label{burination}}

\textbf{Short Description} Removal of spalls along the margins of other
flakes.

\textbf{Definition} Removal of flakes where the core face is the sharp
margin of the flake. Flakes from this process have two ventral surfaces,
the parent flake's, and its own.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Illustrations of flakes with evidence of
spalls taking across their lateral, proximal, or distal margins. Burins,
or burin spalls described as present.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} No description of burins, burin spalls, or
microburin technique, and no illustrations showing burins as described
above. Do not count if the burination could be coded as tranchet
resharpening

\textbf{Typical exemplars} Figure 16. from Smith et al.~2016. all
examples.

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Close but no} Mention of `impact burnation', `spalling',
`core-on-flake'.

\hypertarget{tranchet-removal.}{%
\subsection{Tranchet removal.}\label{tranchet-removal.}}

\textbf{Short Description} Retouch of a core-tool by removing a flake
across the face at the distal margin or bit.

\textbf{Definition} Retouch of a core-tool by removing a flake across
the face at the distal margin or bit. The spall removed in this process
is typically curved, and may be trihedral in a way similar to a burin
spall. One lateral margin of the spall will be the distal margin/bit of
the core-tool. The opposite face of the core tool will have a remnant on
one face of the spall, adjacent to the ventral surface of the spall.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Description of tranchet resharpening in
text. illustration of core-tools with negative from tranchet spall
visible. Illustration of tranchet spalls themselves with further
description that these represent tranchet spalls.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} Do not count if there is no evidence in
illustrations for tranchet resharpened core tools, and there is no
mention of tranchet spall in text, or otherwise no mention of
resharpening of bit through removal of transverse flake.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} Figure 17. Pieces 1-3.

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} Illustrations of core-tools with unambiguous
examples of tranchet resharpening, but no description of this method of
resharpening in text.

\textbf{Close but no} Illustrations of what appear to be tranchet
spalls, in context of a site with core-tools that could reasonably have
been resharpened with such spalls, but no description in the text that
these spalls served that purpose.

\hypertarget{pressure-retouch}{%
\subsection{Pressure retouch}\label{pressure-retouch}}

\textbf{Short Description} Pressure flaking retouch

\textbf{Definition} Retouching a piece (core-tool or flake) with
application of pressure.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Invasive flake scars on retouched pieces
that are extremely narrow (\textasciitilde.5mm), thin (\textless.1mm,
and relatively invasive (\textasciitilde5mm) OR description of pieces as
pressure flaked.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} no evidence of scars consistent in pressure
flaking AND no discussion of pressure flaking in the text.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} `There were x pressure flaked bifaces in the
assemblage'

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} `Burin spalls removed through pressure
flaking', or `microblade manufacture on end nosed scraper were removed
through pressure flaking.'

\textbf{Close but no} `biface was thinned through invasive and delicate
removals', `delicate burin spalls removed'.

\hypertarget{bifacial-retouch}{%
\subsection{Bifacial retouch}\label{bifacial-retouch}}

\textbf{Short Description} Retouch on both faces of a flake or
core-tool.

Definition** Retouch on both faces of a flake or core-tool, struck from
the same platform.

\textbf{Inclusion criteria} Descriptions of bifacial retouch,
illustrations of pieces with retouch on both faces.

\textbf{Exclusion criteria} No mention of bifacial retouch, no
illustrations of retouched pieces showing bifacial retouch.

\textbf{Typical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Atypical exemplars} NA

\textbf{Close but no} NA

\textbf{Other notes} Never count both bifacial and unifacial retouch on
same piece.

\hypertarget{figures}{%
\section{Figures}\label{figures}}

Figure 1. Figure 23 illustrating levallois point variation from Kibish
formation (Shea, 2008).

Figure 2. From figure 5 illustrating levallois flake and centripetal
flake diversity (Picin \& Vaquero, 2016).

Figure 3. Figure 2 illustrating schematic drawings of blade manufacture
methods in Queensland (Moore, 2003).

Figure 4. Figure 4 on technological blade classifications at Rose
Cottage Cave (Soriano et al., 2007).

Figure 5. Figure 1 in in description of Levallois technology (Bordes,
1980).

Figure 6. Figure 2 in description of Levallois technology (Bordes,
1980).

Figure 7. Figure 5 description of bladelet core preparation at 'Ein
Qashish with distal preparation at step 4.(Malinsky-Buller et al., 2014)

Figure 8. Figure 2. Schematic illustrating busqued burin production
methods at La Ferrassie (Chazan, 2001).

Figure 9. Figure 2. Microblade core variability at Amakomanak.(Coutouly,
2017)

Figure 10. Initial blade subtypes from Kfar HaHoresh (Barzilai \&
Goring-Morris, 2010).

Figure 11. Figure 4 in description of blade cores from Fumane cave
(Falcucci \& Peresani, 2018).

Figure 12. Figure 14 illustrating platform spalls from bidirectional
blade cores recovered from Kfar HaHoresh (Barzilai \& Goring-Morris,
2010)

Figure 13. Figure 2 illustrating hammer dressing on stemmed obsidian
tool from Biak Island, West Papua (Robin Torrence et al., 2009).

Figure 14. Figure 13 illustrating projectile points recovered from Motza
(Khalaily et al., 2007).

Figure 15. Figure 8 illustrating some retouched tool tyles from Ayn Abu
Nukhayla (Henry \& Mraz, 2020).

Figure 16. Figure 5 illustrating burin variation at the PPNA site El
Hemmeh (Smith et al., 2016).

Figure 17. Figure 14 illustrating tranchet axe variability at Motza
(Khalaily et al., 2007).

\hypertarget{bibliography}{%
\section{Bibliography}\label{bibliography}}

Barzilai, O., \& Goring-Morris, A. N. (2010). Bidirectional Blade
Production at the PPNB Site of Kfar HaHoresh: The Techno-Typological
Analysis of a Workshop Dump. Paléorient, 36(2), 5--34.
\url{https://doi.org/10.3406/paleo.2010.5386}

Bordes, F. (1980). Le débitage Levallois et ses variantes. Bulletin de
la Société préhistorique française, 77(2), 45--49.
\url{https://doi.org/10.3406/bspf.1980.5242}

Chazan, M. (2001). Bladelet Production in the Aurignacian of La
Ferrassie (Dordogne, France). Lithic Technology, 26(1), 16--28.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1080/01977261.2001.11720973}

Clarkson, C., Shipton, C., \& Weisler, M. (2015). Front, back and sides:
Experimental replication and archaeological analysis of Hawaiian adzes
and associated debitage: A study of Hawaiian adze manufacture.
Archaeology in Oceania, 50(2), 71--84.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1002/arco.5056}

Coutouly, Y. A. G. (2017). Amakomanak: An Early Holocene Microblade Site
in Northwestern Alaska. Arctic Anthropology, 54(2), 111--135.
\url{https://doi.org/10.3368/aa.54.2.111}

Falcucci, A., \& Peresani, M. (2018). Protoaurignacian Core Reduction
Procedures: Blade and Bladelet Technologies at Fumane Cave. Lithic
Technology, 43(2), 125--140.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1080/01977261.2018.1439681}

Henry, D. O., \& Mraz, V. (2020). Lithic economy and prehistoric human
behavioral ecology viewed from southern Jordan. Journal of
Archaeological Science: Reports, 29, 102089.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jasrep.2019.102089}

Hruschka, D. J., Schwartz, D., St.John, D. C., Picone-Decaro, E.,
Jenkins, R. A., \& Carey, J. W. (2004). Reliability in Coding Open-Ended
Data: Lessons Learned from HIV Behavioral Research. Field Methods,
16(3), 307--331. \url{https://doi.org/10.1177/1525822X04266540}

Khalaily, H., Bar-Yosef, O., Boaretto, E., Bocquentin, F., Le Dosseur,
G., Erikh-Rose, A., Goring-Morris, A. N., Greenhut, Z., Marder, O.,
Sapir-Hen, L., \& Yizhaq, M. (2007). Excavations at Motza in the Judean
Hills and the Early Pre-Pottery Neolithic B in the Southern Levant.pdf.
Paleorient, 33(2), 5--37.

MacQueen, K. M., McLellan, E., Kay, K., \& Milstein, B. (1998). Codebook
Development for Team-Based Qualitative Analysis. CAM Journal, 10(2),
31--36. \url{https://doi.org/10.1177/1525822X980100020301}

Malinsky-Buller, A., Ekshtain, R., \& Hovers, E. (2014). Organization of
lithic technology at 'Ein Qashish, a late Middle Paleolithic open-air
site in Israel. Quaternary International, 331, 234--247.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quaint.2013.05.004}

Moore, M. W. (2003). Australian Aboriginal Blade Production Methods on
the Georgina River, Camooweal, Queensland. Lithic Technology, 28(1),
35--63. \url{https://doi.org/10.1080/01977261.2003.11721001}

Perreault, C., Brantingham, J., Kuhn, S. L., Wurz, S., \& Gao, X.
(2013). Measuring the Complexity of Lithic Technology. Current
Anthropology, 54(8).

Picin, A., \& Vaquero, M. (2016). Flake productivity in the Levallois
recurrent centripetal and discoid technologies: New insights from
experimental and archaeological lithic series. Journal of Archaeological
Science: Reports, 8, 70--81.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jasrep.2016.05.062}

Rosenthal, E. J. (1996). San Nicolas Island Bifaces: A Distinctive Stone
Tool Manufacturing Technique. Journal of California and Great Basin
Archaeology, 18(2).

Schmidt, I. (2011). A Middle Stone Age Assemblage with Discoid Lithic
Technology from Etemba 14, Erongo Mountains, Northern Namibia. Journal
of African Archaeology, 9(1), 85--100.

Shea, J. J. (2008). The Middle Stone Age archaeology of the Lower Omo
Valley Kibish Formation: Excavations, lithic assemblages, and inferred
patterns of early Homo sapiens behavior. Journal of Human Evolution,
55(3), 448--485. \url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2008.05.014}

Shimelmitz, R., Barkai, R., \& Gopher, A. (2011). Systematic blade
production at late Lower Paleolithic (400--200 kyr) Qesem Cave, Israel.
Journal of Human Evolution, 61(4), 458--479.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2011.06.003}

Smith, S., Paige, J., \& Makarewicz, C. A. (2016). Further diversity in
the Early Neolithic of the Southern Levant: A first look at the PPNA
chipped stone tool assemblage from el-Hemmeh, Southern Jordan.
Paléorient, 42(1), 7--25. \url{https://doi.org/10.3406/paleo.2016.5691}

Soriano, S., Villa, P., \& Wadley, L. (2007). Blade technology and tool
forms in the Middle Stone Age of South Africa: The Howiesons Poort and
post-Howiesons Poort at Rose Cottage Cave. Journal of Archaeological
Science, 34(5), 681--703.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2006.06.017}

Spinapolice, E. E., \& Garcea, E. A. A. (2013). The Aterian from the
Jebel Gharbi (Libya): New Technological Perspectives from North Africa.
African Archaeological Review, 30(2), 169--194.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1007/s10437-013-9135-2}

Tversky, A., \& Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under Uncertainty:
Heuristics and Biases. Science, 185(4157), 1124--1131.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1126/science.185.4157.1124}

Wilkins, J., \& Chazan, M. (2012). Blade production \textasciitilde500
thousand years ago at Kathu Pan 1, South Africa support for a multiple
origins hypothesis. Journal of Archaeological Science, 1--18.

\end{document}
